A Revisited "Intro to 3D Page" (#9481)
godotengine/godot-docs: tutorials/3d/introduction_to_3d.rst

the 3D platformer tutorial, or the 3D kinematic character tutorials,
which are almost identical to their 2D counterparts.

.. figure:: img/godot-tps-demo.webp
   :align: center
   :alt: An example 3D game demo created using Godot

>    Godot Third Person Shooter (TPS) Demo, available on `Github repository <https://github.com/godotengine/tps-demo>`__ or :ref:`Asset Library <doc_project_manager_downloading_demos>`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   Godot Third Person Shooter (TPS) Demo, available on the `Github repository <https://github.com/godotengine/tps-demo>`__ or the :ref:`Asset Library <doc_project_manager_downloading_demos>`.
```

In 3D, math is a little more complex than in 2D, so also checking the
:ref:`doc_vector_math` entry in the wiki (which was especially created for game
developers, not mathematicians or engineers) will help pave the way for you
to develop 3D games efficiently.

3D workspace
~~~~~~~~~~~~

Editing 3D scenes is done in the 3D workspace. This workspace can be selected
manually, but it will be automatically enabled when a Node3D node is
selected.

.. image:: img/tuto_3d3.webp

Similar to 2D, the tabs below the workspace selector are used to change between

> currently opened scenes or create a new one using the plus (+) button. Left and

Reviewer: ```suggestion
currently opened scenes or create a new one using the plus (+) button. The left and
```

right docks should be familiar from :ref:`editor introduction <doc_editor_introduction>`.

Below the scene selector, the main toolbar is visible, and beneath the main toolbar
is the 3D viewport.

Main toolbar
------------

Some buttons in the main toolbar are the same as those in the 2D workspace. A brief explanation

> is given if mouse cursor is hovered on a button for one second. Some buttons may have

Reviewer: ```suggestion
is given if the mouse cursor is hovered on a button for one second. Some buttons may have
```

.. image:: img/3d_toolbar.webp

- **Select Mode** (:kbd:`Q`): Allows selection of nodes in the viewport. :kbd:`Left click` on a node to select one. :kbd:`Left-clicking` and dragging a rectangle selects all nodes within the rectangle's boundaries, once released. Holding :kbd:`Shift` while selecting adds more nodes to the selection. Clicking on a selected node while :kbd:`Shift` is pressed deselects the node.
- **Move Mode** (:kbd:`W`): Enables move (or translate) mode for the selected nodes. See :ref:`doc_introduction_to_3d_space_and_manipulation` for more details.
- **Rotate Mode** (:kbd:`E`): Enables rotation mode for the selected nodes. See :ref:`doc_introduction_to_3d_space_and_manipulation` for more details.
- **Scale Mode** (:kbd:`R`): Enables scaling and displays scaling gizmos in different axes for the selected nodes. See :ref:`doc_introduction_to_3d_space_and_manipulation` for more details.

- **Show the list of selectable nodes at the clicked position**: As the description suggests, this provides a list of selectable nodes at the clicked position as a context menu, if there is more than one node in the clicked area.

> - **Lock** (:kbd:`Ctrl + L`) the selected nodes, preventing selection and movement in the viewport. Clicking the button again (or using :kbd:`Ctrl + Shift + L`) unlocks the selected nodes. Locked nodes can only be selected in the scene tree. They can easily be identified with a padlock next to their node names in the scene tree. Clicking on this padlock also unlocks the nodes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Lock** (:kbd:`Ctrl + L`) the selected nodes, preventing selection and movement in the viewport.
  Clicking the button again (or using :kbd:`Ctrl + Shift + L`) unlocks the selected nodes. Locked nodes can only be selected in the scene tree.
  They can easily be identified with a padlock next to their node names in the scene tree. Clicking on this padlock also unlocks the nodes.
```

> - **Group selected nodes** (:kbd:`Ctrl + G`). This allows selection of root node if any of the children are selected. Using :kbd:`Ctrl + G` ungroups them. Additionally, clicking the ungroup button in the scene tree performs the same action.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Group selected nodes** (:kbd:`Ctrl + G`). This allows selection of the root node if any of the children are selected.
  Using :kbd:`Ctrl + G` ungroups them. Additionally, clicking the ungroup button in the scene tree performs the same action.
```

- **Use Local Space** (:kbd:`T`): If enabled, gizmos of a node are drawn using the current node's rotation angle instead of the :ref:`global viewport axes <doc_introduction_to_3d_coordinate_system>`.

> - **Use Snap** (:kbd:`Y`): If enabled, movement and rotation snap to grid. Snapping can also temporarily be activated using :kbd:`Ctrl` while performing the action. The settings for changing snap options are explained below.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Use Snap** (:kbd:`Y`): If enabled, movement, and rotation snap to grid. Snapping can also temporarily be activated using :kbd:`Ctrl` while performing the action.
  The settings for changing snap options are explained below.
```

> - **Project Camera Override**: If you wish to view another area of the level within the game during editing, you can utilize this feature. This action temporarily replaces the active camera in the level (e.g., the camera following the player) with the camera in the Godot editor's viewport, allowing you to move freely and inspect the level's different parts.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Project Camera Override**: This allows viewing another area of the level within the game during editing.
  This action temporarily replaces the active camera in the level (e.g., the camera following the player) with the camera in the editor viewport,
  allowing you to move freely and inspect the level's different parts.
```

- **Toggle preview sunlight**: If no DirectionalLight3D exist in the scene, a preview of sunlight can be used as a light source. See :ref:`doc_introduction_to_3d_preview_environment_light` more details.
- **Toggle preview environment**: If no WorldEnvironment exists in the scene, a preview of the environment can be used as a placeholder. See :ref:`doc_introduction_to_3d_preview_environment_light` more details.
- **Edit Sun and Environment Settings (three dots)**: Opens the menu to configure preview sunlight and environment settings. See :ref:`doc_introduction_to_3d_preview_environment_light` more details.

- **Transform menu**: It has three options:

   - *Snap Object to Floor*: Snaps an object to a solid floor.

>    - *Transform Dialog*: Opens a dialog to adjust transform parameters (translate, rotate, scale, and transform type) manually.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   - *Transform Dialog*: Opens a dialog to adjust transform parameters (translate, rotate, scale, and transform) manually.
```

>    - *Snap Settings*: Allows you to change transform, rotate snap (in degrees) and scale snap (in procent) settings.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   - *Snap Settings*: Allows you to change transform, rotate snap (in degrees), and scale snap (in procent) settings.
```

- **View menu**: Controls the view options and enables additional viewports:

.. image:: img/tuto_3d6.webp

> In this menu, it is also possible to show/hide grids and the origin.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this menu, you can also show/hide grids and the origin.
```

Moreover, a specific type of gizmos can be toggled off in this menu.

.. image:: img/tuto_3d6_2.webp

> An open eye means that the gizmo is visible, closed eye means it is hidden.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
An open eye means that the gizmo is visible, a closed eye means it is hidden.
```

> Half-open eye means that it is also visible through opaque surfaces.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A half-open eye means that it is also visible through opaque surfaces.
```

Clicking on *Settings* in this view menu opens a window to change the *Vertical Field of View (VFOV)* parameter
(in degrees), *Z-Near*, and *Z-Far* values.

> Next to the View menu, additional buttons can be visible. In the toolbar image

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Next to the View menu, additional buttons may be visible. In the toolbar image
```

at the beginning of this chapter, an additional *Mesh* button appears because a

> MeshInstance3D is selected. This menu can provide some quick actions or tools to

Reviewer: ```suggestion
MeshInstance3D is selected. This menu provides some quick actions or tools to
```

different scale is usually a bad idea (unless you know what you are doing).

When working with 3D assets, it's always best to work in the correct scale (set
the unit to metric in your 3D modeling software). Godot allows scaling
post-import and, while this works in most cases, in rare situations it may
introduce floating-point precision issues (and thus, glitches or artifacts) in
delicate areas such as rendering or physics. Make sure your artists always work
in the right scale!

The Y coordinate is used for "up". As for the horizontal X/Z axes, Godot uses a
**right-handed** coordinate system. This means that for most objects that need
alignment (such as lights or cameras), the Z axis is used as a "pointing
towards" direction. This convention roughly means that:

-  **X** is sides
-  **Y** is up/down
-  **Z** is front/back

See this chart for comparison with other 3D software:

.. figure:: img/introduction_to_3d_coordinate_systems.webp
   :align: center
   :alt: 3D coordinate systems comparison chart

   Image by `Freya Holmér <https://twitter.com/FreyaHolmer>`__

.. _doc_introduction_to_3d_space_and_manipulation:

Space and manipulation gizmos
-----------------------------

> Moving, rotating, and/or scaling objects in the 3D view is done through the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Moving, rotating, and scaling objects in the 3D view is done through the
```

manipulator gizmos.
Each axis is represented by a color: Red, Green, Blue represent X, Y, Z
respectively. This convention applies to the grid and other gizmos too
(and also to the shader language, ordering of components for
Vector3, Color, etc.).

.. image:: img/tuto_3d5.webp

Some useful keybindings:

> -  To snap placement or rotation, press :kbd:`Ctrl` while moving, scaling

Reviewer: ```suggestion
-  To snap placement or rotation, press :kbd:`Ctrl` while moving, scaling,
```

   or rotating.
-  To center the view on the selected object, press :kbd:`F`.

In the viewport, the arrows can be clicked and held to move the object on an axis.
The arcs can be clicked and held to rotate the object.
To lock one axis and move the object freely in the other two axes, the colored rectangles
can be clicked, held, and dragged.

> If transform mode is changed from *Select Mode* to *Scale Mode*, the arrows will be 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If the transform mode is changed from *Select Mode* to *Scale Mode*, the arrows will be 
```

replaced by cubes, which can be dragged to scale an object as if the object is being moved.

Navigating the 3D environment
-----------------------------

In 3D environments, it is often important to adjust the viewpoint or angle
from which you are viewing the scene.
In Godot, navigating the 3D environment in the viewport (or spatial editor)

> is possible in multiple ways.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
can be done in multiple ways.
```

> Default 3D scene navigation controls are similar to Blender (aiming to

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The default 3D scene navigation controls are similar to Blender (aiming to
```

> have some sort of consistency in the free software pipeline..), but

Reviewer: ```suggestion
have some sort of consistency in the free software pipeline), but
```

options are included to customize mouse buttons and behavior to be
similar to other tools in the Editor Settings. To change the controls
to Maya or Modo controls, you can navigate to **Editor Settings > Editors > 3D**.
Then, under *Navigation*, search for *Navigation Scheme*.

.. image:: img/tuto_3d4.webp

> Using the default settings, the following shortcuts introduce how one can

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Using the default settings, the following shortcuts control how one can
```

navigate in the viewport:

> Pressing :kbd:`Middle mouse button` and dragging the mouse allows you to orbit around 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Pressing the :kbd:`middle mouse button` and dragging the mouse allows you to orbit around 
```

the center of what is on the screen.

> It is also possible to :kbd:`Left-click` and hold the manipulator gizmo located

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It is also possible to :kbd:`left-click` and hold the manipulator gizmo located
```

on the top right of the viewport to orbit around the center:

.. image:: img/tuto_3d_gizmo.webp

:kbd:`Left-clicking` on one of the colored circles will set the view to the chosen

> orthogonal and the current will be shown will be updated accordingly.

Reviewer: This sentence is fragmentary

Author: "[...]and the viewport's view menu will be updated accordingly."

.. image:: img/tuto_3d_updated_view_menu.webp

> If *Perspective* view is enabled on the viewport (can be seen on viewport's View menu,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If the *Perspective* view is enabled on the viewport (can be seen on the viewport's View menu,
```

> not the View menu on the main toolbar), holding :kbd:`right mouse button` on the viewport

Reviewer: ```suggestion
not the View menu on the main toolbar), holding the :kbd:`right mouse button` on the viewport
```

> or using :kbd:`Shift + F` switches to "free-look" mode.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
or pressing :kbd:`Shift + F` switches to "free-look" mode.
```

> In this mode, it is possible to move mouse to look around, use :kbd:`W` :kbd:`A` 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this mode you can move the mouse to look around, use the :kbd:`W` :kbd:`A`
```

:kbd:`S` :kbd:`D` keys to fly around the view, :kbd:`E` to go up, and :kbd:`Q` to 

> go down. To disable this mode, release the :kbd:`right mouse button` or use

Reviewer: ```suggestion
go down. To disable this mode, release the :kbd:`right mouse button` or press
```

:kbd:`Shift + F` again.

> In the free-look mode, it is also possible to temporarily increase the flying

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the free-look mode, you can temporarily increase the flying
```

speed using :kbd:`Shift` or decrease it using :kbd:`Alt`. To change and keep the

> speed modifier use :kbd:`Mouse wheel up` or :kbd:`Mouse wheel down`, to increase and

Reviewer: ```suggestion
speed modifier use :kbd:`mouse wheel up` or :kbd:`mouse wheel down`, to increase or
```

decrease it, respectively.

In orthogonal mode, holding :kbd:`right mouse button` will pan the view instead.

> Use :kbd:`Keypad 5` will toggle between perspective and orthogonal view.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Use :kbd:`Keypad 5` to toggle between perspective and orthogonal view.
```

> More shortcuts can be found on :ref:`doc_default_key_mapping_shortcuts_spatial_editor`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
More shortcuts can be found on the :ref:`doc_default_key_mapping_shortcuts_spatial_editor`
```

  Clicking on this padlock also unlocks the nodes.
- **Group selected nodes** (:kbd:`Ctrl + G`). This allows selection of the root node if 
  any of the children are selected.
  Using :kbd:`Ctrl + G` ungroups them. Additionally, clicking the ungroup button in 
  the scene tree performs the same action.
- **Use Local Space** (:kbd:`T`): If enabled, gizmos of a node are drawn using the current node's 
  rotation angle instead of the :ref:`global viewport axes <doc_introduction_to_3d_coordinate_system>`.
- **Use Snap** (:kbd:`Y`): If enabled, movement, and rotation snap to grid. Snapping can also 
  temporarily be activated using :kbd:`Ctrl` while performing the action.
  The settings for changing snap options are explained below.
- **Project Camera Override**: This action temporarily replaces the active camera in the level 
  (e.g., the camera following the player) with the camera in the editor's viewport, allowing you 
  to move freely and inspect the level's different parts, while game is running.
- **Toggle preview sunlight**: If no DirectionalLight3D exist in the scene, a preview 
  of sunlight can be used as a light source. See 

>   :ref:`doc_introduction_to_3d_preview_environment_light` more details.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  :ref:`doc_introduction_to_3d_preview_environment_light` for more details.
```

- **Toggle preview environment**: If no WorldEnvironment exists in the scene, a preview of the 
  environment can be used as a placeholder. See 

>   :ref:`doc_introduction_to_3d_preview_environment_light` more details.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  :ref:`doc_introduction_to_3d_preview_environment_light` for more details.
```

- **Edit Sun and Environment Settings (three dots)**: Opens the menu to configure preview 
  sunlight and environment settings. See :ref:`doc_introduction_to_3d_preview_environment_light` 

>   more details.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  for more details.
```

- **Transform menu**: It has three options:

   - *Snap Object to Floor*: Snaps an object to a solid floor.
   - *Transform Dialog*: Opens a dialog to adjust transform parameters (translate, rotate, scale, 
     and transform) manually.
   - *Snap Settings*: Allows you to change transform, rotate snap (in degrees), and scale snap 

>      (in procent) settings.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
     (in percent) settings.
```

- **View menu**: Controls the view options and enables additional viewports:

.. image:: img/tuto_3d6.webp

In this menu, you can also show/hide grids, which are set to 1x1 meter by default,

> and the origin, where the blue, green, and the red axis lines intersect.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
and the origin, where the blue, green, and red axis lines intersect.
```

> Moreover, a specific type of gizmos can be toggled off in this menu.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Moreover, specific types of gizmos can be toggled in this menu.
```

can be done in multiple ways.

The default 3D scene navigation controls are similar to Blender (aiming to
have some sort of consistency in the free software pipeline), but
options are included to customize mouse buttons and behavior to be
similar to other tools in the Editor Settings. To change the controls
to Maya or Modo controls, you can navigate to **Editor Settings > Editors > 3D**.
Then, under *Navigation*, search for *Navigation Scheme*.

.. image:: img/tuto_3d4.webp

Using the default settings, the following shortcuts control how one can
navigate in the viewport:

Pressing the middle mouse button and dragging the mouse allows you to orbit around 
the center of what is on the screen.

It is also possible to left-click and hold the manipulator gizmo located
on the top right of the viewport to orbit around the center:

.. image:: img/tuto_3d_gizmo.webp

Left-clicking on one of the colored circles will set the view to the chosen
orthogonal and the viewport's view menu will be updated accordingly.

.. image:: img/tuto_3d_updated_view_menu.webp

If the *Perspective* view is enabled on the viewport (can be seen on the viewport's View menu,

> not the View menu on the main toolbar), holding the right mouse button on the viewport

Reviewer: ```suggestion
not the View menu on the main toolbar), holding down the right mouse button on the viewport
```

members representing location, Euler rotation (X, Y and Z angles) and
scale.

.. image:: img/tuto_3d2.webp

3D content
~~~~~~~~~~

Unlike 2D, where loading image content and drawing is straightforward, 3D is a
little more difficult. The content needs to be created with special 3D tools
(also called Digital Content Creation tools, or DCCs) and exported to an
exchange file format to be imported in Godot. This is required since 3D formats
are not as standardized as images.

Manually authored models (using 3D modeling software)
-----------------------------------------------------

.. FIXME: Needs update to properly description Godot 3.x workflow
   (used to reference a non existing doc_importing_3d_meshes importer).

There are two pipelines to import 3D models in Godot. The first and most common
one is by :ref:`doc_importing_3d_scenes`, which allows you to import entire
scenes (exactly as they look in the 3D modeling software), including animation,
skeletal rigs, blend shapes, etc.

The second pipeline is by importing simple .OBJ files as mesh resources,
which can be then put inside a :ref:`MeshInstance3D <class_MeshInstance3D>`

> node for display.

Reviewer 2: I'm not sure if this distinction actually makes sense. The importing 3D scenes page covers importing OBJ files, but having the information like this implies that it doesn't. I think there should just be a brief paragraph that directs readers to the importing 3D scenes page for all externally created models.

Author: Removed the second part and wrote a more generic text pointing to "importing 3d scenes".

> Generated geometry

Reviewer 2: I think we should link to the page on using CSG tools(https://docs.godotengine.org/en/stable/tutorials/3d/csg_tools.html) in this section, especially since CSG models can be exported from Godot

Author: Updated.
